This is an interview with Norman Borlaug.
Today's date is February 7th, 1986.
This is a test.
Last time, oh, today is February 7th, 1986.
And this is another interview with Dr. Norman Borlaug.
Last time we were talking about changes in the 1970s, and we talked about a number of them.
And one of those is the development of tritracle.
Triticale.
Okay, triticale.
T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E T-R-I-T-I-C-A-L-E T-R
This has a long, painful process behind it.
Way back in the 1890s, someone saw in a mixed field of wheat and rye, somewhere in Europe, I believe it was, something that looked like a cross between these, between rye and between wheat.
The head was bigger.
It turned out that despite the vigor of the plant, the grain was shriveled and formed.
And now on the basis of what's known, this was a natural cross.
And apparently, but when you make this cross, you get a seed that you plant.
That plant in turn will be almost, if not entirely sterile.
It won't produce seed.
It'll have a big hit.
It'll look beautiful.
But once in a while,
And the reason for this is that you have these sets of chromosomes from the Y and the wheat and they're not compatible.
Like a dog and a cat in the same room.
They won't breathe.
They won't cross.
And so each one goes in its own corner.
And the result is that what should become a grain never sets in that.
first hybrid plant.
That is, you get the cross seed, you plant it, and quite often you get a plant.
But the next generation, there's no seed.
It's the same old story of the mule.
The mule, you know, is a cross between a horse and a donkey, or an ass.
But with the exception of one that was supposed to have
been made fertile by hormones at Cornell about two years ago.
No one has ever seen a colt or a young animal born from a mule.
So you have these incompatibilities.
But no one could even make these plants artificially because they were difficult to cross until about 1936 when
and I think one of the first was done, and his name is gone right now, was at Iowa State, a cytogeneticist who moved on later to Penn State, crossed wheat and rye.
And then by that time it was known that a certain extract from the spring crocus
which is an alkaloid, when you put it at the right concentration on the growing tip of this new seedling, it would not affect chromosome division.
They would go ahead and divide.
But what should have become two cells in the apical growing point, the cell wall was never laid down.
It interfered with cell wall deposition.
The result was then the sets of the wheat chromosomes divided, duplicated themselves.
The rye ones did also.
And each one set of each should have gone into the new cell.
But in this case, since there was no new cell division laid down or cell wall, you ended up with two sets of wheat, two sets of rye in that growing point.
And when this happens,
Then you will get partial seed.
You'll get seed produced.
So you can propagate this thing.
There were several people who spent their lifetime trying from 1936 onward.
Especially Sanchez Monque, a Spaniard who's still alive.
How would you spell that?
S-A-N-C-H-T.
M-O-N-G-I-E, and Arne Munzing, M-U-N-Z-I-N-G, from Sweden, who passed away several years ago.
They spent their career trying to make this into a commercial crop, but there were great difficulties.
they got so that they could produce these seedlings that would produce some seeds so you could perpetuate it and you could select and improve it.
But the progress was painfully slow.
I first got interested in it in 19...
Let's see, 1958 at the first international wheat genetic symposium in Winnipeg, Canada.
When I saw it growing in what they called the Living Herbarium, they had a great collection of wheats for this international symposium.
And it was there where we had some of the first semi-dwarf Mexican wheat that were growing there as exhibits.
This was before they had become commercial, of course.
They were still kind of ragged, but they were impressive.
And right beside them were these tremendously
headed criticalist that Dr. Shebesky, S-H-E-V-I-S-K-I, who was the dean, Len Shebesky, dean at the University of Manitoba, had brought together.
And I looked at this, and my colleague, the late Joe Rupert,
We were pretty impressed.
We had seen some of these big sterile heads when we were graduate students, but I'd never seen the plant grow.
And so Joe Rupert, who was then in charge of our weed program in Chile, arranged to get a few of these triticales to take with him to Chile, and he began to work on them because we in Mexico were up to our eyeballs trying to
overcome many of these problems that still existed in these dwarf weeds.
The grain was riveled and the disease resistance was not adequate, although they were very promising.
See, in 58, it was about four years before the first commercial variety came out of the semi-dwar.
And so Joe worked on these for about, Joe Rupert, for about, oh, I guess four or five years.
when we were finally getting to a point where the wheat was going pretty good he sent us some of these back to Mexico and we began to work on it and it so happened that these plants would grow most of them were developed in northern climates in other words with long days
As I pointed out, we got our first docks from Canada.
But he was using primarily the ones from Spain, from Sanchez Monti, and from Moonsingh from Sweden, plus some new ones that he had made, that Chavesky had made.
And when you grew these under Mexican conditions, it was like the Canadian weeds or the northern spring weeds.
They're poorly adapted to the short days.
That means they keep growing, growing, growing, growing, taller and taller.
They never want to mature.
But we had a lot of these grown.
We were working with them.
We were crossing them too.
And in 1950, no, in 19... We saw...
some reasonably good progress.
We have been able to shorten them down.
But the sterility or partial sterility in shrivel seed was still a bad problem.
They were too late in maturity.
It so happened that in 19, I suppose, 19,
We had had a large number of these critticales, mostly sterile, poor types, but they were surrounded by all the fields of our breeding material in wheat.
What must have happened was that with tongue-in-cheek, I always say this, some of my colleagues at that time
dim point of view of expressing it that way, but I said, apparently some night when we were still asleep, some of these pretty aggressive little dwarf pollen grain from these dwarf Mexican weeds flying around and found a promiscuous tall triticale, and they crossed.
And we were selecting many plants.
We didn't see this.
No evidence of this.
They were regrown and multiplied.
And then in the spring, or in the, yes, in the spring, so we must have selected them again in the fall of 67 and in the spring of 68, when I came back from
I should say that, in the fall of 67, we had in Toluca Valley, which is close to Mexico City, High Valley, about five acres, at least tall, mostly late, but once in a while there was a short one in there.
Most of them sterile, you'd just feel the head and it was empty.
So after we'd finished all the wheat, selecting the wheat plants, I had about seven graduate students, mostly from Pakistan and Egypt, Argentina.
I said, all right, we only got this half day to go through all of this.
Most of it is garbage.
So I had one rather experienced Argentinian with me, and I said, you take three of them over there, these young people, one on either side, two on one side.
I have two on each side, and we go down through so many rows.
Look at the healthy plants, but don't pull them out.
It's too much work.
Just feel if they've got grain in them.
Yeah.
It was just a slip shot way through it.
We pulled out all of these plants, dried them, and by the time the harvest was finished, I left for India or Pakistan.
Did any of them have grain?
Yes.
It was shrift.
But my colleagues took them to
By then I had two people who were going to work on tree kenny.
One was there during the harvest but had left before we got to this.
He was Canadian, Frank Zielinski.
carried on this program for a number of years.
And the other one was George Vargas, carrying Portuguese name, but he's from South India, from the old Goan enclave, originally.
And so they planted these, and in the spring again, after spending some time in Sonora,
for pollinating the wheat.
I left for India and Pakistan.
And when I came back to the experiment station in Sonora, I drove into the station.
There was Zelensky and Barghese.
Before I could turn off the motor on my car, they practically pulled me out and they said, come and see what we've got.
There they were.
There were seven short rows of
Triticales, completely fertile, all the heads on every plant.
Then there were another 20 that were segregating.
In other words, some plants were completely fertile and others were completely sterile.
Of course, when we thrashed the grain, it was all shriveled.
Some less so.
But those plants that had that complete fertility had acquired several other important characteristics.
One, they were semi-dwarf.
They'd inherited the dwarfing gene.
Sure.
Along with the fertility.
And they were a month earlier than those tall Canadian triticales we started out, indicating that whatever that semi-dwarf Mexican week was, it must have been rather short, maybe even a triple dwarf, or at least a double dwarf.
that was early maturing and that had the ability to restore the fertility.
So then we began an active program, dressing.
Both of these people worked for a number of years on this.
Our guest was moved to Africa on the wheat program, and Savinsky carried on.
To make a long story short,
It was a long, painful agony to try to change the grain filling, that is the plumpness, the test weight, the milling quality.
But gradually they have been getting better.
They have the ability to grow
on acid soil, poor soils.
Yeah, that's what I want to talk about.
Poor soils.
That's what I want to talk about.
Yeah, I want to find out, well, what are the benefits?
All right.
I mean, why do we want this to begin with?
First of all, rye has the ability to grow on soils that wheat grow poorly on, especially acid soils, sandy soils.
In rye,
From a nutritional standpoint, even though it's still debated as to what the real cost is, there's a toxic substance or a substance that affects the nutritional value.
For example, in chickens or in monogastric animals like swine, if you add more than
In the case of poultry, 68% egg production goes down, the body weight increase drops down, and swine it also cuts back on the growth rate, and the body weight gain.
Then why doesn't this happen in human beings?
The reason is that when you bake it in bread, you destroy whatever this metabolite is that affects the physiology of the monogastric animal.
When we began to analyze these crosses, some of these weeds didn't have this.
These trinicales seem to have better nutritional quality by far than the
And considerably better for certain test animals than wheat.
Also these plants have tremendous vigor.
although there were many things wrong with them and so we finally got vigor in the sense of growing the plants yeah grow vigorous okay fast growers faster than wheat or rye and we began to test them also for forage production for grazing or for hay
And the total amount of dry weight produced, some of them, indicated that they had good potential there also.
So we started making a lot of crosses, sending materials around to collaborators.
So in other words, they were easier.
They could go back to about 70.
They could be grown in porous soil.
They had potentially higher nutritional value, and they grew faster.
They grew more vigorously, let's say.
You could see the seedings.
jumped out of the ground and grew rapidly.
But when you start with a crude species like this, it's highly improbable that you will make them.
tremendous progress overnight.
The euphoria now of biotechnology should take a lesson from the long struggle we've had in triticale.
These things don't change overnight.
And there's been a tremendous amount of publicity about what's coming from all of the new biotechnology, genetic engineering, and in some cases there have been substantial things that have
are coming to the fore in medicine, better antibiotics, insulin produced by genetic engineering, which doesn't have the disadvantage of the side reactions that you get, insulin that's taken from the organs of swine, which used to be one of the main sources.
from the slaughterhouse, if you will.
So there are things that are happening.
And I think that some of the things that look very promising, like the growth hormones in animals, offer a great deal of problems.
But that doesn't mean that all of this biotechnology is suddenly going to change wheat production or corn production or rice production or any of our major crop species.
Certain things that are spun off from this, although they preceded the so-called biotechnology that has its label today, this ability to
use hormones to stimulate multiple ovulation in, let's say, beef cattle, so that rather than one of them coming down, there are several hormone injections and then artificial semination, then recovering that fertilized egg in a few days at the right stage.
and transplanted to other cows that are low grade.
But this would be used on unusually good dams and sires.
And so you could recover several eggs at each fertilization.
And this might go on several times a year.
And now they've even got so that they can, at the early stage, split one of those four fertilized eggs
into four and get four calves transplanted like that.
Now that's been done experimentally, not on a commercial base.
But they can transplant these multiple fertilized eggs to other surrogate cows and raise the calf.
And the calf, of course, is like its mother genetically, true mother, and like the bull.
And even though the surrogate mother is the one that nourished it in her innards during the whole period, genetically she has nothing in common.
So there are many things that will come like this, but how did I get off on that track?
The point is that we have now worked pretty intensively for, from 68
So 86.
That's a long time.
68, 78.
18 years.
36 growing seasons.
Right.
And we have seen a lot of progress.
Now, some of these triticales, when they're compared to wheat under certain conditions, produce as much as or more than the best wheat.
Even the best one has still got problems.
The straw is too weak, even though they're short.
Or the short ones, the grain is still too shriveled.
We have others where the grain is good and plump.
Many of the grains from these new triticale sprout in the head if it's rainy at time of harvest.
And of course that destroys the value.
both from the standpoint of bread making or any other use.
That is gradually being corrected.
And probably we've collaborated with quite a few countries.
My own personal belief is that Poland will probably become the first country to use these triticalis on a big commercial scale.
We've had good collaboration with
Dr. Wolski, their chief geneticist.
He's visited us many times, and we've visited him.
Why Holland?
I mean, besides personnel, I mean, Holland has good soil, and it has plenty of rainfall, and it has... All right, let me tell you, Poland, because of this.
Oh, Holland or Poland?
Poland.
Oh, Poland.
I thought you said Holland.
No, Poland.
Okay.
It produces seven million tons of rye.
That rye can mostly only be used for bread because of these toxic metabolites, whatever they have.
Their main interest in meat is swain.
So they got real problems.
It's too far north with the present corn varieties to grow corn.
They got themselves into this economic crisis when they were importing large quantities of corn and soybeans.
They had developed a very large poultry industry because they like chicken meat also.
And part of this was used for swine.
The main base of food feed for their swine production has always been potatoes, boiled or steamed potatoes.
But you have to supplement this with protein, and so the soybean was the main source, but some from corn.
But then when their military government, when they got removed from the favored trading partner, the whole poultry industry collapsed.
Because they couldn't import from the United States.
And the swine production has gone down greatly.
Because they imported corn from us?
Right.
And so they're moving forward as fast as possible.
When I was there a couple of times in 1982, they had one of these out in preliminary multiplication, one of these triticaleys.
But it was an unusually cold winter and in some places the winter
injury was quite severe.
But it had been tested and was being tested not only in Poland, but in Western Germany, France, England, Holland, and all of those countries.
And in those countries, winter was not so severe.
They did very well.
And it's being grown commercially in some of those countries, still on a rather modest scale.
But now Wolski has got two new ones in multiplication that have better frost resistance.
And I think within two or three years there will be substantial acreages.
Australia has gone into rather sizable production of some of these as a feed grain because they do better than wheat.
poor barley on some of the poor soils.
And there's several hundred thousand acres.
Argentina is starting to multiply a couple.
They have also resistance to certain diseases, bettering resistance.
For example, one of the smuts that's not an important problem worldwide, but it's called Carnal Bund.
It's a minor disease, but one we know very little about.
It's indigenous to India, Pakistan, Iran, Afghanistan, most of the near Middle East.
We've got it in Mexico.
We've had it for a long time.
How it moved around, we don't know.
It has to have a special climate to survive.
But most all of the wheat varieties are susceptible when ecological conditions are favorable for infection.
So this may also help you to find another niche that will help promote it.
Now the question is, will it become a crop to
supplement the other small grains.
My own feeling is there's enough evidence now that it will.
How soon it will occupy that position because of these advantages I've mentioned remains to be seen.
The original financing for this crop when we became involved came from this source.
The Canadian financing was in an endowed chair at the University of Manitoba, and it came from the Bauchman family, which are really the owners of the Canadian distilleries.
Anyway, this big distillery company.
You mean, like beer?
No, a ride.
Oh, like Canadian Club, whiskey?
Canadian Club, all of this.
The Boston is the name of the company.
I mean, of the family.
And so their program was started from this endowed chair.
And as Rupert and I looked at this, we weren't sure that we could justify spending any of our money.
This was pre-Simmon.
This was still Rock Color Foundation program in Mexico and Chile and Colombia.
But we grabbed some of those seeds and Joe bootlegged it under the wheat.
Then when he sent some of these back to me in 65 and I grew them in Mexico, I thought they were pretty impressive, still full of defects.
So I went to the Rockefeller Foundation and I said, I think this is a horse that's worth betting.
Why don't you give a little additional funds?
University of Manitoba, and we will work with them.
And I'm convinced enough, by then, Simit was coming into being.
I'm convinced that it's got some merit.
It should be studied, and I'll try to get a small budget in Simit.
And this was done.
That's the way we got started.
Now, of course, this has been... And the Ford Foundation hired Zelinsky.
He was the person who took over that.
He spent...
I guess about ten years before you retired on that program, under Ford Foundation sponsorship, but attached to SIMIT.
Now, of course, the financing is under the general SIMIT budget, which means the whole
So is that where the major research is being done now at CIMIT?
But now there's a lot of research going on in certain other countries.
For example, in Australia, in Poland, in Argentina.
It's generated quite a bit of enthusiasm.
The question always is asked, look, if it was so good, where are the results?
My answer is, you know, when Neolithic women first domesticated wild wheat and wild barley and wild oats, not much happened probably for them.
quite a few thousand years.
And yet this has come this far in 18 years.
So far that under certain conditions it can compete with wheat and have advantages which makes it more desirable.
So give us a little time.
But the point that I want to make also is that when you start in something entirely new, it takes time.
And I go back again
to the whole euphoria of biotechnology, genetic engineering, recombinant DNA.
It's one thing in bacteria or lower forms of life where you can grow millions and billions of cells and turn them over in a few days' time.
It's something entirely different when you can only grow two generations a year.
And so the time frame
that you'll have to work with in the higher plants, like our main commercial crops, or developing new commercial crops like Triticale.
It's an agonizingly slow process, but progress is being made, and I hope to live to see, assuming they don't blow the whistle on me too soon, to see this become a substantial commercial crop to supplement
wheat and other small grains for certain soil and ecological and climatological and perhaps nutritional uses.
You know, we're talking about a really interesting topic that I wanted to get to eventually, and that is that whole idea of genetic manipulation and bioengineering and the hormone shots for animals to... Okay, if you want to do that on a different time, then we can...
do it then.
I just opened it up here not knowing whether you were interested.
Oh yeah, I want to talk about that.
I mean, would you like to address that now?
I think it might be better if I kind of look through and get a little better focus in one of the later ones.
Okay.
We open the general picture here.
Okay, okay, because those are topics that
I mean, I have friends over in Agricultural Sciences, and they're doing all kinds of experiments on dairy production, and it's very interesting.
The dairy production is very impressive.
I've been visiting Professor Cornell for the last three years also.
And I heard Bauman give his seminar when he first announced his fantastic results after completing a whole lactation cycle.
I've forgotten the number of cows.
But it was a sizable number.
The most he could handle with the amounts of pure hormone that was available.
And depending on the individual cow that was involved, the increased milk production was on the order of 30 to 38 percent.
And yet with a surprisingly small reduction in body weight.
I still don't understand all of its implications, how this is going about this.
And after he'd made his presentation, it was very good, I was truly impressed.
I said, Dr. Bowman, how much loss of body weight contributed to this increase in milk production?
He says, it was not statistically significant.
How much increase in food intake resulted from this?
He said, again, it was marginal, but statistically, with the small number of animals that they were working with, not significantly.
And I said, well, how do you explain this?
He said, how did you explain this when you started working with those little short wheats and giving these results?
I said, at that time, we didn't explain it.
Now, of course, in the case of the wheat and the part, or these dwarf plants, more of the photosynthate goes into the grain than into growing all of that straw.
That's in partitioning the photosynthes, photosynthate.
And he says, well, maybe we have a small amount of this going on that might be part of the cow's fat storage, but it's marginal, that's been converted into milk, but there must have been a corresponding increase in muscle tissue in part, because otherwise you measure it in body weight changes.
He says it's not clear.
So they don't really know.
But that's the way research on the frontier goes.
You don't know what's going on a lot of times.
You see the gross effect, but you don't know.
You see in those dwarf weeds, when we were growing those, in the early part, nobody really knew what was going on.
I guess that's the way we are in this milk situation with the animal corn bars.
Okay, well, we'll talk about this another time, and we'll talk about this whole issue, because it has a lot of ethical issues that go right along with it.
Just off the record, do you know Bob Blake?
Blake?
By name only.
You'd like to meet him.
He's doing that type of work here.
He's a good friend of mine.
But we'll talk about that later.
I want to...
change the topic then, there are a lot of newer organizations that were linked with CEMET during the 1970s and I'd like to talk about the organizational structure and how it changed and the cooperation or coordination between
the International Center for Tropical Agriculture, the International Institute for Tropical Agriculture, and the Ford and Rockefeller Foundations.
How does it all relate?
What kind of relationship did they have?
Prior to 1970, the main forces
behind foreign technical assistance programs in the higher concert were Ford Foundation, Rockefeller Foundation was the primary organization.
Ford Foundation seemed to join.
Indirectly, mostly from a nutritional standpoint, also the Kellogg Foundation.
They operated in a different way.
They didn't have country programs.
Mostly it was for fellowships and these sort of things.
and USAID.
USAID, let me go back to that, I don't know whether we covered this or not, the history of the Rockefeller program.
It began in agriculture in 1943 in Mexico.
Did we cover this?
Yes, we have covered this.
And we also have the other oral history that was done, that was done by, yeah, we have that.
All right.
Then just to stick in the timing sequence here.
That program you see preceded the Marshall Plan by about
six, seven years, and it preceded President Truman's .4 program by seven years.
.4 evolved eventually into USAID, which became a very big promoter of improved technology in third world countries, especially after
in the middle 50s.
But they were not tied together in any way at all.
And then other governments began to, Canadians especially, began to become interested in this.
But there was, I think, one focal point that evolved after the Nobel Prize in 1970 that brought them all together.
I think it's fair to say that
Agriculture is the ugly duckling in most spheres.
It's looked down as a science.
It's second-rate, according to many of the elitists that are part of our university systems.
I'm not talking about in the College of Agriculture, but even there you get the cleavage with the new biotechnology.
They think they're going to solve all of these problems in agriculture's peripheral.
They're damn well mistaken.
They probably don't realize this.
Whatever improvements that they make will have to be
put into a commercial operation by means of the existing programs.
They aren't going to modify
the makeup of a cow and have her perfect from whatever manipulation they make, or any of these other discoveries, which are important.
Don't get me wrong.
But it will have to be incorporated into the total picture.
Now, going back to this ugly duckling image of agriculture, I guess it's because incomes on the land
in the industrial countries compared to and ease of life compared to that in the urban areas which enjoy by and large up until very recently.
Better schools and opportunities in art and crafts and all of the rest of it, better housing for the most part, have contributed to this sort of
looking at agriculture and agricultural science, for that matter, as a kind of second-rate opportunity.
For a bunch of hicks.
Yeah, that's exactly what it is.
And I think if one thing that helped refocus thinking about this was the Nobel Peace Prize in 1970.
because this was the first time that agricultural scientists had ever gotten a Nobel Prize.
Really?
You were the first one?
I should amplify this in one way.
Lord Boyd Orr, the founding father, the first director general of
FAO, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, won the Nobel Peace Prize.
For his contributions to nutrition during the war, he brought Britain with all its problems on food supplies coming in through the war in a surprisingly good state of nutrition, considering the handicapped.
And he was awarded this.
as well as for his interest in getting FAO, the ideas, focal ideas, and the thing going.
But from the standpoint of a working agricultural scientist, when I received the Peace Prize, and it was a Peace Prize because there's no provisions made for agricultural science,
in the Nobel Foundation.
When I received the Peace Prize, this kind of focused attention because it came on the heels of this tremendous food shortage in South Asia.
which in the middle 60s corresponded to what we've seen the last several years in foods and storage and hunger and misery in the African countries south of the Sahara.
There were many at that time, starting with Bill Paddock, with Paul Ehrlich, with Holden,
who said... Population bomb.
Population bomb.
Forget about them.
They've overshot the population target.
There's nothing can be done.
The world has lost its capacity to produce the food that's needed for this rapidly expanding world population.
You know the songs of gloom and doom.
And it was then...
that in the early 60s, when the program, late 59, when the program of the wheat program was being turned over to the Mexican scientist, Dr. Narraez, and his colleagues when we trained.
And a year later, the whole Mexican program was turned over to the people we trained.
And I think this is in the tape someplace.
I traveled looking at what might be done to increase wheat production from Morocco to India.
And I said we had to start training young people, interdisciplinary.
And I proposed bringing them to Mexico where they could see what it
taken place recently rather than to the U.S.
where this change had been gradual and the agriculture was not very sophisticated and it had been evolving over 100 years of time.